
      Jump to navigation
    The global economy is broken. 8 billionaires own the same wealth as half the world’s population. Meanwhile, every day 1 in 9 people go to bed hungry. It doesn’t have to be this way. We can choose another future. Join us and demand an economy that works for everyone  and not just  the few. Share this video and sign the petition.To save and protect lives, governments worldwide must act together and responsibly. Add your voice, join the movement and sign the petition now!Millions of people are being forced from their homes, risking everything to escape conflict, disaster, poverty or hunger. From those fleeing the war in Syria or climate change-induced droughts, to those stranded in inadequate conditions in Europe, you can help us give life-saving support to refugees in the countries where they need it most.With no end in sight to the conflict in Syria, hundreds of thousands of people are living in desperate conditions and exposed to continuing violence. Today, half the pre-conflict population of 22 million Syrians have fled their homes and more than 13.5 million people urgently need your help.Government leaders, ministers, and other representatives from countries participating in the COP 23 climate summit in Bonn spoke at the start of the "high-level segment."Reacting to remarks by German chancellor Angela Merkel, Jan Kowalzig, Oxfam Germany’s climate change policy lead said:“Angela Merkel referred to Germany’s 2020 emission reduction target, but failed to explain how her next government plans to avoid the looming embarrassment of missing that target by a wide margin. This would have been a powerful way to show she’s dedicated to meeting the Paris Agreement.“With political parties in Berlin gridlocked over plans to phase out the country’s oldest and dirtiest coal power plants, Merkel needs to show how she’ll live up to the very public promises that she’s made. Reacting to remarks by French president Emmanuel Macron, Armelle Le Comte, Oxfam France’s climate policy lead said:“Climate leadership is about concrete actions, not just rhetoric. Without any new announcements on finance for climate-vulnerable communities, it appears Emmanuel Macron came empty-handed to Bonn.“Macron has organized a separate summit in Paris next month; this is his opportunity to commit to doubling France’s funding for climate adaptation and finally adopt the European financial transaction tax. Doing so would send a strong signal that he’s serious about following through on his words." Reacting to remarks by Acting Assistant Secretary Judith Garber, Jesse Young, senior advisor at Oxfam America said:“Today, the U.S. said it remains open to staying in Paris, and wants to help the world address the challenges of climate change. But until they cease their efforts to leave Paris and actually invest in policies to fight climate impacts — today’s statement will be worth little more than the paper on which it was written.”Simon Hernandez-Arthur in Bonnsimon.hernandezarthur@oxfam.org | +1 (585) 503 4568 | @SimonHernandezJoin Oxfam International on social media:Join Oxfam Mexico on social media:Join Oxfam Italy on social media:Join Oxfam-Québec on social media:Join Oxfam Great Britain on social media:Join Oxfam France  on social media:Join Oxfam Ireland on social media:Join Oxfam New Zealand on social media:Join Oxfam Japan on social media:Join Oxfam Canada on social media:Join Oxfam India on social media:Join Oxfam Novib (Netherlands) on social media:Join Oxfam Intermón (Spain) on social media:Join Oxfam Hong Kong on social media:Join Oxfam Germany on social media:Join Oxfam America on social media:Join Oxfam Australia on social media:Join Oxfam-in-Belgium on social media:Join Oxfam in Sweden on social media:Join Oxfam IBIS (Denmark) on social media:Join Oxfam in Korea on social media:Join Oxfam Brazil on social media:Join Oxfam South Africa  on social media:Take me there nowNo continue on this site